Hello, hello, hello, and welcome
to English Learning for Curious
Minds, by Leonardo English, the show
where you can listen to fascinating
stories and learn weird and wonderful
things about the world at the same
time as improving your English.
I'm Alastair Budge, and today is
the start of another three-part
mini-series, this time on modern Egypt.
In part one, this episode, we are going to
be talking about The Egyptian Revolution.
In part two, the next episode, we are
going to be looking at the huge new
city Egypt is trying to build in the
desert, and ask ourselves whether it is a
much-needed modernisation of the country,
or a sign of something more sinister.
And in part three, we are going to
talk about the case of Giulio Regeni,
the Italian PhD student who was
abducted from the streets of Cairo,
tortured and brutally murdered, almost
certainly by the Egyptian police.
OK then, let’s get right into it and
talk about the Egyptian Revolution.
With the benefit of hindsight,
most revolutions look obvious.
Whether it is an autocratic leader, an
unsympathetic elite, widespread famine,
police brutality, systemic corruption,
high unemployment, runaway inflation,
the lack of political freedom or some
combination of any or all of these, it’s
easy for historians to look back and say,
“the conditions were ripe for revolution”.
Egypt in 2011 would have had a tick in the
box for practically all of those things.
High unemployment, inflation, police
brutality, lack of civic freedoms,
corruption, and of course an autocratic
leader in the form of Hosni Mubarak.
But Egypt had had all of these,
including Mubarak, for three decades.
The majority of living Egyptians
had known nothing else.
On the 6th of October, 1981, Egypt’s
third president, Anwar Sadat, was
assassinated during a military parade.
His assassins were Islamists who did
not agree with Egypt’s increasingly
close relationship with Israel and held
President Sadat wholly responsible.
With Sadat dead, blown up by grenades,
his vice-president, the then 53-year-old
Hosni Mubarak, was sworn in eight
days later, becoming president of the
Middle East’s most populous country.
Mubarak used the threat of Islamic
extremism to continue the country’s
“state of emergency”, which gave the
state heightened powers to arrest,
detain, and question if there was even
the tiniest inkling of wrongdoing, and
in many cases, even if there wasn’t.
Protests were banned, political
opponents were jailed, and the secret
police kept a watchful eye on anyone
who dared to whisper a complaint.
For three decades, Mubarak ruled
the country with an iron fist,
using the military and security
forces to suppress opposition and
maintain control over the population.
To the outside world, Mubarak sold
himself as a steady hand, a stable and
strong leader in a volatile region.
Better a friendly dictator
than, well, the unknown.
And for a while, it worked.
The West, especially the United States,
propped him up with billions in aid,
happy to have a reliable ally who
kept the peace with Israel and the
oil flowing through the Suez Canal.
For Mubarak and his cronies, his family
and his allies, life was good, very good.
One estimate put his wealth
at as much as $70 billion.
On the President’s official salary of
$70,000 a year, it would have taken him
a million years to save that much money,
but perhaps he was just a canny investor.
No.
He was egregiously corrupt, and he and
his allies siphoned off huge amounts
of the country’s wealth and stashed it
in Swiss banks and foreign property.
Of course, this was at the
expense of the average Egyptian.
Like in any highly-corrupt regime,
the loss isn’t just the direct
loss of money flowing out of the
country to off-shore bank accounts.
It’s the fact that business is
harder, foreign companies don't
want to invest in the country; the
corruption drags everything down.
And beneath this international
façade of stability, the
Egyptian people were suffocating.
In 2011, nearly 40% of the
population still lived below
the poverty line, scraping by
on less than two dollars a day.
Young people, who made up a huge
chunk of Egypt’s 100 million-strong
population, faced a grim future.
University graduates, full of hope,
ambition, and qualifications, found
themselves driving taxis or selling
fruit on street corners because
there simply weren’t enough jobs.
Inflation was eating away at
what little money people had.
Bread, a staple of the Egyptian diet,
became a luxury for some families.
And if you dared to speak out about it?
Well, the police were more than
happy to remind you who was in
charge, often with a baton or worse.
The tipping point, or at least what
most commentators see as the first
domino to fall, came in late 2010, 2,000
kilometres to the West, in Tunisia.
A 26-year-old street vendor
called Mohamed Bouazizi had been a
regular target for Tunisian police.
He was frequently hassled and
shaken down for bribes, forced
to pay money to the police.
On December 17th, 2010, the
police came up to him again.
It’s not clear exactly what happened,
and there are varying accounts,
but most reports suggest that
the police knocked over his fruit
cart and took his weighing scales.
With no way to make money and still
needing to pay his supplier for the
produce that he was planning on selling
that day, he went to the local governor’s
office to explain what happened and
demand the return of his scales.
He had borrowed money to pay for
the goods, and now the police had
destroyed his only way of earning
enough to pay back his debt.
The governor wouldn’t listen.
Bouazizi then went to a petrol
station, bought a can of petrol, and
returned to the governor’s office.
He stood outside in the street, lifted
the petrol can up above his head,
emptied it all over himself, shouting,
“How do you expect me to live?”
He then lit a match,
engulfing his body in flames.
Watchers-on rushed to him and
were able to put out the flames.
He was rushed to hospital, but he
didn’t make it; he died 18 days later.
The story of Mohamed Bouazizi
spread like wildfire.
Social media posts, videos,
and news reports captured
the attention of millions.
In Tunisia, protests erupted almost
immediately, and soon the streets were
filled with people calling for change.
Within a month, Tunisia’s president, Zine
El Abidine Ben Ali, had fled the country.
A dictator who had ruled for 23
years, brought down by the power
of a single act of defiance.
And as the news spread, so
did the spirit of protest.
In Egypt, the frustration and anger
that had been simmering for decades
were finally ready to boil over.
Bouzazi was just like millions of
other young people all over the Arab
world, struggling every day to make
ends meet, with seemingly no way
out of the situation, and at the
mercy of a corrupt police state.
Add to the fire social media
- Facebook, Twitter, and YouTube.
These became powerful tools for
mobilising protestors, bringing people
together and sharing information.
Facebook pages sprang up calling for
demonstrations, and videos of the
Tunisian protests were shared widely.
One page in particular, named
“We Are All Khaled Said,” became
a focal point for activists.
Khaled Said was a young Egyptian
man who had been beaten to death
by the police, and his story had
sparked outrage across the country.
Then came January the 25th, 2011.
It’s National Police Day in Egypt, a
day that commemorates the more than
50 Egyptian police officers who were
killed by the British army in 1952.
In theory, it’s a day where the Egyptian
people remember and honour the police.
But this day in 2011 would be
marked for a different reason.
Through social media, people
were encouraged to take to the
streets not to support the police
but to protest against them.
This was very much a grassroots
protest: people who organised
Facebook pages, people encouraging
others on Twitter, it was not led
by any one individual or group.
Still, people came out in their droves.
Thousands of people gathered in Cairo,
Alexandria, and cities across the country.
Their demands, initially, were more about
living conditions and social justice
than anything else: the right to live a
decent life, free from police harassment.
It was about fairness, the ability for
ordinary Egyptians to feed their family
and live without the fear of being
extorted or murdered by the police.
They chanted for bread,
freedom, and justice.
At first, the government’s response
was predictable – tear gas, rubber
bullets, arrests, the textbook
response of an authoritarian regime
in the face of public protest.
But unlike previous protests, the
demonstrators didn’t disperse.
They stood their ground,
buoyed by the sense that this
time, something was different.
Tahrir Square, right in the
heart of Cairo, became the
epicentre of the uprising.
Day and night, people occupied
the square, camping out
despite the threat of violence.
Then, two days later,
the country went dark.
The largest internet service providers
were turned off, as were telephone lines.
Mubarak and his cronies had seen that this
movement was being partially facilitated
through social media - Facebook, Twitter
and YouTube - and clearly thought that
simply blocking this, switching it
off, would bring about an end to it.
It did not work and only served to
light a greater fire in the belly
of the Egyptians on the street.
As the days went on, the protests
only grew larger, with some outlets
reporting that a million people
had gathered in Tahrir Square.
The government began to panic.
Mubarak tried to placate the crowds
by promising reforms and reshuffling
his cabinet, but it wasn’t enough.
The army was deployed, but in a twist,
they refused to fire on the protestors.
Soldiers and demonstrators
mingled, and some soldiers even
showed solidarity with the people.
Mubarak’s position was becoming
increasingly untenable.
The United States, which had supported
him for decades, was now calling
for restraint and even reform.
Finally, on February 11th, 2011,
after 18 days of relentless
protest, Mubarak stepped down.
The announcement was made by
his vice president, and the
crowds erupted in jubilation.
The crowds in Tahrir Square danced
and cheered, the dictator was gone.
The Egyptians had done it – they
had overthrown a man who had
ruled their country for 30 years.
But the joy would prove to be short-lived.
Toppling Mubarak was one thing;
figuring out what came next
was a whole different beast.
For several months in the immediate
aftermath, the military stepped in
to run things, promising elections.
Meanwhile, political groups that
had been crushed under Mubarak, from
secular activists to youth movements,
trade unions to fledgling political
parties, they all scrambled to
organise, sensing their opportunity.
But the problem was that Mubarak
had spent decades rigging the game,
leaving only token opposition.
And the main opposition, or rather,
the main apparent opposition,
was the Muslim Brotherhood.
This wasn’t exactly a
new player on the scene.
It was founded in 1928, and had grown
into Egypt’s largest and best-organised
Islamist movement, preaching social
justice through a large network of
charities, schools, and mosques.
For years, Mubarak had banned it outright,
jailing its leaders and branding it a
threat, yet letting it linger in the
background as something of a bogeyman.
Mubarak had always framed it as a
simple choice: me, the tough military
man you know, or the Islamists.
In other words, better the devil
you know than the devil you don’t.
Now, with Mubarak out of the picture,
the Muslim Brotherhood saw its moment.
It had a tremendous headstart.
Unlike other political parties,
it wasn’t starting from scratch.
Its decades underground had built a
machine no other group could match.
While secularists and youth rallied
in Tahrir Square with passion but
little structure, the Brotherhood
had members, money, and a plan.
Still, initially, it lacked mass appeal.
Egypt might be a Muslim-majority
country, but that didn’t mean
the majority of Egyptians wanted
to be ruled by an Islamic group.
To try to appeal to a broader population,
the group softened its more radical edges,
talking more about jobs and fairness than
Sharia law, and launched a new political
party, the Freedom and Justice Party.
This wasn’t the Muslim Brotherhood, it was
something new, refreshing, and idealistic.
Not everyone bought it.
To some, especially the urban middle
class and Coptic Christians, it
smelled like a power grab dressed
up as reform; to others, people who
had grown weary of corruption and
poverty, it offered hope of a new dawn.
Polls from late 2011 showed a mixed
picture—about 30% of Egyptians backed
them, far ahead of any rival, but
trust was shaky, with many fearing an
Islamist agenda was hidden behind the
smiles and promises of prosperity.
Then, in May of 2012, 14 months after
the fall of Mubarak, Egypt held its
first democratic presidential election.
The Egyptian people faced a stark choice.
On one side was Ahmed Shafik,
a former Air Force officer and
Mubarak’s last prime minister, who
promised continuity and stability.
A safe pair of hands, albeit
not so different from those
the people had just overthrown.
On the other was Mohamed Morsi, a
softly-spoken former engineering
professor and the Brotherhood’s pick
to lead its Freedom and Justice Party.
It was close, but Morsi scraped it, with
51.7% of the vote to Shafik’s 48.3%.
Turnout was just over 50%, so
Morsi won with the votes of around
¼ of the country’s population.
The Brotherhood had seized its chance.
For the first time, Egypt
had a democratically elected
president, and Morsi promised a
new era of openness and reform.
But he’d inherited a country on its knees.
Tourism was practically dead,
foreign investors had bolted, and
bread lines were sparking riots.
Morsi, like many political leaders,
found that governing the country was a
lot harder than winning the election.
The Muslim Brotherhood had spent decades
as an underground movement, organising
charity networks and building grassroots
support, but it had precious little
experience in the business of actually
administering a country, and it showed.
To make matters worse, the military
wasn’t exactly thrilled to see
an Islamist calling the shots.
Yes, Mubarak was gone, but the
police and the military were still
just as powerful as before, and
they were circling like vultures.
Then, Morsi made a fatal miscalculation.
He overreached.
In November of 2012, he issued a
decree giving himself near-absolute
power, claiming it was temporary
to protect the revolution from
the judiciary, which he believed
was still loyal to the old regime.
Then came a new constitution,
rushed through by his allies.
Secular and Christian groups walked
out, calling it an Islamist takeover,
and when it passed in a referendum,
barely a third of Egyptians voted.
To many, Morsi wasn’t building
a new Egypt, he was turning
it into an Islamic state.
Protests erupted once again,
but this time, they were
directed at the new president.
The sense of unity that had characterised
the anti-Mubarak protests was gone,
replaced by deep political polarisation.
All this optimism had, within 12 months
really, given way to disappointment.
And the army, which had craftily
positioned itself as a kind
of neutral protector, began
to reassert its influence.
By mid-2013, the discontent with
Morsi had reached boiling point.
Some polls pegged his
approval rating as low as 30%.
Millions took to the streets,
demanding his resignation.
But this wouldn’t prove to
be a people’s revolution.
The military saw their chance.
On July 1st, they issued an ultimatum:
sort this out in 48 hours, or we step in.
Morsi dug his heels, insisting
he was the legitimate president,
elected by the people, which
of course, technically he was.
But legitimacy doesn’t mean much
when the country’s against you
and the army is itching to act.
On July 3rd, 2013, General Abdel
Fattah el-Sisi, the head of the
armed forces, went on TV and
announced that Morsi was out.
Morsi, it seems, did not have
much of a say in the matter.
Tanks rolled into Cairo, President
Morsi was arrested, and an
interim government was set up.
Sisi, this stern-faced military man with a
knack for staying in the shadows, suddenly
became the face of Egypt’s next chapter.
To Morsi’s supporters, this was a coup,
plain and simple: a betrayal of the
democratic dream they’d fought for.
The Muslim Brotherhood and its
supporters organised sit-ins
demanding Morsi’s return.
For weeks, they held out, but on August
14th, 2013, the military cracked down.
What happened next was called by Human
Rights Watch a crime against humanity.
Security forces stormed the camps,
firing live rounds into the crowds.
It was one of the bloodiest days in
modern Egyptian history, with some reports
saying that more than a thousand peaceful
protestors were killed by the army.
The Brotherhood was outlawed again,
its leaders jailed or executed,
but Sisi didn’t stop there.
Tens of thousands—activists, bloggers,
even students—were rounded up in a
sweeping crackdown that made Mubarak’s
repression look mild by comparison.
In 2014, Sisi ran for president, winning
in a landslide against a token opponent.
The world watched on with mixed feelings.
The U.S., wary of losing an ally,
avoided calling it a coup, while Gulf
states like Saudi Arabia cheered,
glad to see the Brotherhood crushed.
Sisi had done it, and he has remained
Egypt’s President to this very day.
To his fans, he was a saviour, the
strongman Egypt needed to stop the chaos.
To his critics, he was Mubarak
2.0: same military playbook, same
authoritarian tendencies, just a new face.
Protests were crushed, journalists
locked up, and that “state of
emergency” Mubarak loved so much?
Sisi brought it back with a vengeance.
The revolution’s dreams of bread,
freedom, and social justice faded
into the background as stability,
however harsh, took centre stage.
So, after Egypt’s rollercoaster ride from
Mubarak to Morsi to Sisi, the country
is stuck with another military dictator.
Is he any better than the last one?
Well, that’s a debate Egyptians
are still wrestling with today.
OK then, that is it for today's
episode on the Egyptian Revolution.
As a reminder, this was part
one of a three-part mini-series
on the theme of “modern Egypt”.
Next up will be an episode on this bold
new project to build a capital city in
the Egyptian desert, and in part three,
we will look at the gruesome but important
case of the murder of Giulio Regeni.
You've been listening to English Learning
for Curious Minds by Leonardo English.
I'm Alastair Budge, you stay safe, and
I'll catch you in the next episode.